+++
date = "2016-08-01"
title = "List File Main"
original_url = "/list/index.html"

[menu.main]
    identifier = "list"
    name = "List File Main"
        weight = -1
+++
List file editing can be a daunting task, so many tags, what tags to
use, where to use them!Â  Well, in the sections that follow, we reveal
all the secrets that the master monkeys use! So sit back, grab that Code
Monkey Snack (TM Pending) or a banana and prepare to be astounded,
amazed, stunned, and other wise bored senseless if you have no desire to
list edit!

We have several resources to help those wishing to learn the arcane
craft of dataset creation

A good place to start is the [LST File
Classes](/list/lst-file-class/lst-file-class_index.html), they give a good overview of
the basics of the dataset structure as well as detailed instructions on
coding races.

Another good resource is the homebrew/my\_dataset directory in the data
folder. This is a framework for a PCGen dataset. It is meant for
beginners who want to take their first steps in entering their own
custom data into PCGen and have found that the built-in List Editors are
too limiting for what they intend to do. It contains some commented out
examples and a lot of advice and tips for putting your own sets
together. You can get up and running fast by renaming the elements in
this set to your suit your needs.

Once you start delving deep into LST code you're going to want to keep
the [LST Index](/navlistindex.html) handy. Most LST tags have been
documented with details on their use.

There are [Standards](/standards.html) to follow when creating a doc
entry for a LST token.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![Valid HTML 4.01
Strict](../images/system/valid-html401.png)](http://validator.w3.org/check?uri=referer)

