+++
date = "2016-08-01"
title = "File Menu Options"
original_url = "/menu/file/index.html"

[menu.main]
    identifier = "file"
    name = "File Menu Options"
    parent = "menu"
        weight = -1
+++
These are the **File** menu options that are available to use once
sources have been loaded. These options are used for starting a new PC,
loading an existing PC, or exporting a currently loaded PC to a file.

![File Menu Options](../../images/menus/file/menu_file_0.png)

The **New** command allows the user to create a new PC based on the
loaded sources. The newly created PC appears on a new tab in the main
window ready for the user to input the information needed to build the
PC.

![Open Existing PC](../../images/menus/file/menu_file_0_open.png)

The **Open** command prompts the user to pick an existing PC to load.
The **Open** window opens on the last place that the user selected to
save a PC to and shows the available PCs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The **Close** command closes the PC without exiting the application.

The **Close All** command closes all loaded PCs without exiting the
application. PCGen will prompt the user for each PC to see if it needs
to be saved.

![File Menu Options](../../images/menus/file/menu_file_1_save.png)

The **Save** command saves the active PC. If the character has been
saved before, the PC will be saved in the same location, and under the
same name, as previously saved. If the PC has not been saved yet the
**Save** window will pop up with the PC's name already entered into the
filename field. Click the **Save** button and the PC will be saved. The
default location to which the PC will be saved is the "Characters"
folder under the PCGen main directory but the user can navigate to any
location desired.

The **Save As** command allows the user to save the PC under a new
filename. The **Save** window will pop up and ask for the name under
which the PC will be saved. Enter the new name and click the **Save**
button. This will create a new file with the new name used and will not
overwrite the original file from which the PC was loaded.

The **Save All** command is used to save all the open PCs to their
respective files and folders. This is a quick way to save multiple
loaded PCs at one time using the same names that they previously had
before.

The **Revert to Saved** command reverts all changes made to the
character and takes the PC back to the way it was when last loaded or
saved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The [**Party**](/menu/file/party-options.html) command opens a submenu
that provides additional options, allowing the user to save and open a
collection of PCs as a group with a single command.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Character Printing](../../images/menus/file/menu_file_4_print.png)

The **Print** command sends the active PC to the printer using one of
several files.

-   Once the option is selected the **Print** window appears and the
    user selects an output sheet from the drop-down menu at the top of
    the window.
-   Clicking the **Print** button will send the character to
    the printer.
-   Clicking **Cancel** will exit from the print window.

Additional features available on the print window include the following:

-   The **Page** drop-down on the lower-left side of the window will
    change the page showing in the window, allowing the user to preview
    the character sheet.
-   The **Zoom** field an drop-down allows the user to change the zoom
    level of the character sheet. Alternatively, the **Magnifying
    Glass** buttons can be used to zoom in and out of the character
    sheet instead.
-   Clicking and dragging the **Lower Right** corner of the print window
    will resize the window, providing a better view of the
    character sheet.

![File Menu Options](../../images/menus/file/menu_file_3_export.png)

The **Export** command exports the PC to a file used to view the PC.
These are used primarily to view and use the PC with other applications
such as Internet Browsers, Adobe Acrobat, OpenRPG, and others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Between the **Export** and the **Exit** commands you will find a list of
the most recently closed or saved characters. These are included here to
allow convenient loading directly from this menu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The **Exit** command exits PCGen and prompts the user to save the
character(s) before closing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



