+++
date = "2016-08-01"
title = "Tab Options"
original_url = "/tab/index.html"

[menu.main]
    identifier = "tab"
    name = "Tabs"
    parent = ""
        weight = -1
+++
![Tab Options](../images/tabs/tabscommonfeatures.png)

PCGen has a number of different Tab sets to help navigate between the
different character creation screens:

-   **Main Tabs:**\
     These allow you to change between the currently loaded characters.

-   **Character Tabs:**\
     These only appear if a Character's Main tab has been selected. They
    allow you to move around and change the character.

-   **Sub Tabs:**\
     When certain Character Tabs are selected, additional sub tabs will
    appear that allow further navigation. (i.e. The Inventory tab has
    the Purchase and Equipment sub-tabs).

Click on the desired Tab with the mouse and the screen will change to
display that section.

Common interface elements
=========================

Many tabs in PCGen have common interface elements to aid in finding and
sorting through the lists.

The **Search** field allows you to search for items by any text you
enter, PCGen will display only those items which have names or types
that match the text entered, this is the reason the Kukri is displayed
when filtering for the word "dagger", it has the "Dagger" type. If you
have applied any other filters by using the Filter tool the text filter
will limit it's search to those not filtered out by the filter tool. In
other words the items displayed will match both the Filter tool and the
text Filter.

On the right side of many of the lists column label row is a small icon
with three dots in it
![column\_icon.png](../images/tabs/column_icon.png) . When clicked this
will produce a pop up menu displaying all the possible columns the list
can display with a check mark beside each item currently enabled.
Selecting any item will change it's state from either being displayed or
hidden.

Most tabs display lists of items, be they equipment, feats, classes,
templates, etc., many of which the character being worked will not
**Qualify** for. This generally is caused by the presence of a
prerequisite that the character does not meet. These items will appear
in red text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



